# On abuse

Content warning: This article talks about abuse and may be triggering to some.

Today I thought I'd diverge from my usual tech topics and talk about a real life/mental health topic instead. This is something I feel strongly about and usually keep distinct from my tech space, but in a blog, any topic goes.

First, what do I mean by abuse? There are many different types of abuse, including but not limited to emotional, verbal, financial, physical, etc. Generally speaking, abuse causes the victim distress and often involves isolation or controlling several aspects of their life. The exact type does not matter for what I am talking about today. But, as abuse is a nebulous topic and some may bikeshed about what exactly constitutes "abuse", I figured I'd get that out of the way.

However, I'd like to talk about enablers. Enablers, as the name suggests, "allow" the abuse to happen. These may be coworkers, friends or relatives of the abuser who either idly sit by while the abuse happens or in some cases actively encourage it. Enablers tend to be more mild tempered compared to the primary abuser and often the victim feel that they are the more rational or sane person in their circle. However, since enablers are actually cohorts of the abuser, it may take a while for the victim to realize that the enabler is in fact not actually on their side. An example would be a parent who treats the victim nicely, but does nothing about the abuser's behavior (i.e, the other parent).

A flying monkey is a related concept. The name is drawn from the Wizard of Oz, where they're cohorts of the Wicked Witch. They're menacing and do the Wicked Witch's bidding. Enablers who act on behalf of the abuser are called flying monkeys because they commit "abuse by proxy". For example, if a victim sets boundaries to limit communication with the abuser, they may be blindsided by a flying monkey who guilts trip them into re-opening communication.

How does this have knock-on effects? A victim who feel like they cannot trust or confide in anybody will self-isolate and develop poor social skills. If they confide in a relative, the relative may compromise the confidentality and tell the abuser. The flying monkeys may gang up on the victim in a form tantamount to bullying, so the victim feels like they have no one they can trust. The end result is a lack of a support network or close friends, allowing them to continue to be abused. Victims of abuse often befriend abusers as well, as they may not be adept at setting boundaries or identifying toxic behaviors.

Overall, I feel like abuse in general is poorly misunderstood and victims are often blamed or given the sole responsibility to fix their situation, with little to no accountability expected of the abuser. However, I found these concepts to be helpful in succinctly explaining how harmful abuse actually is and how it limits a victim's ability to participate in society.

Even if you have no interest in the topic, I highly encourage readers to do further research. It may help you save a life.
