# Cybersecurity sensationalism

Cybersecurity is a hot field and while we've made leaps and bounds in the field, there's also been a growing number of clickbait and sensationalist headlines making the rounds. Every "major" vulnerability now seems like it needs to be accompanied by a domain, logo and FAQ talking about how dangerous it is. Similarly, on a weekly basis news outlets mention some super sneaky cross platform rootkit undetected by all anti-virus vendors giving hackers full control of your system.

There's an argument to be made that cybersecurity awareness is important, but spreading misinformation and sensationalism in my opinion can actually backfire.

Recently, a cybersecurity "advisor" posted on twitter a screenshot of a supposed Discord scam where an image failing to load allows them to steal your discord token and bypass 2FA. There was only a screenshot, but no technical writeup or proof of concept. One should be skeptical because there are two major vulnerabilities implied here: the ability for an automated script to bypass 2FA to steal your token, and doing so via an image that would bypass Discord's content security policy and/or electron sandboxing.

The author later admitted in the comments that they had gotten a detail about the automated scripting wrong, which should cast doubt on their entire claim. But a Discord staff member later responded by pointing out that the scam is not real, but likely to simply be a phishing scam blown out of proportion. Unfortunately, this did not stop the rumor from spreading like wildfire on Discord and amusingly enough like a game of telephone people kept adding additional details about the scam not present in the original tweet.

Generally speaking, an ethical or serious security researcher would have either privately disclosed it to Discord, or written a technical writeup so that users can be aware of the details and how to fix it (or so Discord can patch it), rather than allowing a vague screenshot to spread like wildfire on Twitter.

Tech news follows the same pattern where supposed undetected and super dangerous threats have been discovered that nobody has heard of. One particular example that stood out to me was the company doing the writeup said that the malware was detected by no anti-virus vendors but their own, so in order to protect yourself, you needed to install their product. To me, this suggested the writeup was actually an advertisement, rather than a serious security piece.

Cybersecurity awareness is a good thing, but we should be more responsible and ethical about how we dispense knowledge so that users don't get misled.
