# No, Github did not get hacked

Previously, I wrote about Cybersecurity Sensationalism and in a stroke of irony I came across a thread/tweet on my feed about a "massive widespread malware attack on GitHub". In the original tweet, the author claims that 35k repositories are infected with commits that contain malware. The evolution of the tweets are interesting. In order:

- they see the repo histories include commits from the original authors, but the commit is not GPG verified
- the commits are obfuscated as legit looking pull requests, but the repo has not received any PRs
- the attacker pushes clones of legit projects to github
- they discovered the "exploit" from a google search
- the author then admits that they are not in fact infected repositories

In other words, it's a big nothing burger and and the attack is essentially spam. There was no attack on GitHub infrastructure nor the developers or the original repositories.

So what's the take away from this? The rushed tweets demonstrate lack of research and rushed reporting. For example, they saw that the repositories only had a single PR and commits from the original author. This would be a good indication they were looking at a fork (ignoring the fact that GitHub makes it plain whether a repository is a fork anyway). It goes without saying that a PR on a fork is essentially useless, and if the malware authors attempted to send the suspicious code to the original repository, it would be stopped by a code review. Further, GitHub doesn't automatically run build workflows if the author is a first time contributor.

Further, it is highly unlikely that a random user would download these random cloned repositories. They would have to go out of their way to do so. It would be a different story if said malware authors attempted to disguise their package as the real one, but it didn't look like this was the case (or at least didn't get that far). The author recommends GPG signing commits, which is undoubtably a good idea, but has nothing to do with this issue as the attackers did not have commit privileges to the original repository.

The tweet has already made its rounds to Reddit and hopefully doesn't spread any further. The moral of the story here is to verify information before blindly repeating it, lest we help spread misinformation.
