# I want the time wasted from solving captchas back

Recaptcha is infamous for being the most user hostile captcha implementation. I feel like I spend up to 5 minutes wasting my time solving the same intractable street sign puzzles over and over, and if your browser is so much even slightly configured to be privacy conscious at all, you will be hit with the most difficult captchas and have to do it all over again.

This is a multi-faceted problem that isn't completely all on recaptcha. Many sites for example use Cloudflare, which is known to be hostile to Tor users, and browsing any site using Tor tends to present you with high difficulty captchas. It's particularly egregious if captchas are sent on certain requests, meaning that you will have to solve it ALL OVER AGAIN even if you successfully solved the last one. Granted, this is configurable by the webmaster, but the fact that it's encouraged or so prevalent at all discourages legitimate users from visiting your site.

On recaptcha's side, there are multiple issues at play here. Firstly, recaptcha tracks users behavior in order to determine if they are likely to be a bot or not. This is quite privacy invasive, but it is part of the reason why if you disable cookies for example or use a privacy-focused setup (like Arkenfox or Tor browser), you will be penalized by recaptcha. Secondly, it's not accessible. There is an audio challenge, but it's frequently broken since people abuse it to bypass the captcha. So you're stuck with the visual challenge. Okay, having to solve a captcha everytime is annoying, but that's not the main issue. The main issue is that for some inane reason, the simple act of being served a captcha makes it think you're a bot and makes the next captcha MORE difficult. So once you're done wasting time on the last one, you're hit with extremely blurry and pixelated pictures that take 3 seconds per click to load in. Finally, it is not at all clear which tiles you're supposed to click as the objects are all over the place and unevenly divided by the squares. There is no consistency or even proper instructions on what to do, so you're stuck with trial and error.

The two common counterarguments in defense of captchas is that it stops bots and helps Google train their self-driving AI. Neither of these arguments are convincing. It's well known that spammer utilize captcha farms and other specialized services. So it doesn't even accomplish its intended purpose of mitigating spam. Further, I'm not entirely sure that I particulary care about huge chunks of my day (the minutes add up) wasted on helping a multibillion dollar company train an AI. Regardless, it is my understanding that the captchas rely on consensus (your attempts have to match other users attempts) and due to the difficulty mentioned above, I cannot see how this would give useful data at all.

There are plenty of other captcha alternatives available (like hcaptcha) which don't give a terrible user experience. I'd like to see more adoption of hcaptcha, or alternatively, ditch captchas altogether. Some websites have instead opted for alternate challenges that are not as easy to abuse while being less frustrating to users.
